---
layout: post
title:  "The 0.0.0.0 kerfuffle"
---

In the beginning, the web platform allowed websites to navigate to, submit forms
to, and load resources, such as images or scripts, from any other website. For
example, in the original design of the web, `website1.test` could load and display
an image from `website2.test`. The image load could even be authenticated via, for
example, cookies. website1.test would not, however, be able to directly read the
response.

In retrospect, this was perhaps not the best decision. It created a new class of
attacks,
[cross-site request forgery](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-site_request_forgery),
and, more generally, it ran afoul of some servers’ assumptions that they could
only be contacted by devices on the same network. For example, an application
running on an intranet might allow arbitrary state changes via POST requests,
and not do any authentication or authorization on those requests, assuming that
only trusted devices on the same intranet can send those requests. This is an
incorrect assumption which any website can abuse.

Over time, the web platform evolved and gave websites more power to trigger
requests to other websites – for example,
[XMLHttpRequest](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/XMLHttpRequest).
The designers of these features tried to avoid expanding the capabilities of
malicious websites to exploit vulnerable servers which don’t assume that the
open web can send them arbitrary requests. These vulnerable servers expect, at
most, to be contacted with a limited set of HTTP requests such as those that can
be triggered by an image load or a form submission. Therefore, web platforms
designers introduced the idea of
[CORS (cross-origin resource sharing) preflight requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Preflight_request):
special HTTP requests that are designed to ask permission from servers to send
them more complex requests from other origins. One website can send a so-called
[simple request](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS#simple_requests)
to another website without a CORS preflight, but for a non-simple request, the
destination server must respond affirmatively to a preflight request before the
browser will send the non-simple request.

(CORS also includes mechanisms for servers to loosen the same-origin policy by
allowing cross-origin requestors to read the bodies of their responses, but
that’s mostly irrelevant to this post.)

More recently, a spate of high-profile vulnerabilities and attacks made it clear
that even simple cross-origin requests can cause real-world harm. Simple
requests – i.e., a request that could be triggered from one website to another
by “legacy” web behavior like an `img` tag or a form submission – can often be
used to exploit real servers on private networks or local hosts, which don’t
expect to receive even simple requests from the public web.

Thus was born the
[Private Network Access](https://wicg.github.io/private-network-access/) project.
Private Network Access aimed to introduce a number of restrictions to prevent
malicious public websites from sending requests to devices on the private
network, without those devices explicitly opting in via CORS-style preflight
requests. Private Network Access has been in development for several years now
and has proven to be a difficult set of restrictions to roll out in practice,
due to compatibility challenges.

In the past few months, some researchers
[discovered](https://www.oligo.security/blog/0-0-0-0-day-exploiting-localhost-apis-from-the-browser)
a popular AI-related application that runs a local server to receive commands,
which can be exploited by HTTP requests from websites. This was framed and
picked up in the press as a browser vulnerability, but in fact this is yet
another example of a vulnerable application incorrectly relying on network
position for authorization. It’s not a new vulnerability that a malicious
website can cause a browser to send requests to the local server – that’s been
the design of the web since the beginning, and while browsers have been trying
to restrict this behavior, that restriction has not yet been successfully
shipped.

The researchers did
([re-](https://github.com/WICG/private-network-access/issues/71))identify a
legitimate browser-related issue: the Private Network Access draft specification
neglected to designate 0.0.0.0 as an address on the private network or local
host. In other words, addressing a malicious request to 0.0.0.0 would have been
a loophole in the restrictions introduced by Private Network Access, had those
restrictions already been rolled out.

In other words, the 0.0.0.0 kerfuffle was not a new browser vulnerability and
it’s misleading to frame it as such. Instead, it would be better framed as a
loophole in an upcoming security measure that browsers have been working to
deploy, but have not yet deployed.
